what happens when we execute any kubectl command.

step1:- kubectl first reads the yaml and converts it to a JSON format.
step2:- It searches for .kube/config file from where the kubectl is getting executed
step3:- kubeconfig contains the cluster, user and current-context details, sometimes it might contain certificates and keys related to user for authentication and sometimes
it will use aws eks get-token command to generate a short-lived token for authentication which means it need to have aws login credentials
step4:- kubectl send request to api-server along with details such as POST /apis/apps/v1/namespaces/default/deployments and token generated.
step5;- EKS authentication layer validates the token, who generated it, the IAM details of that user will be fetched, In the access entries of the EKS it will check if this
IAM role is present.
step6:- checks whether it has authorization to create deployments accordingly
step7:- api-server calls Admission controller and it checks if the namespace exists and resources are in limit range of resource quotas.
step8:- If validation is ok, store the data in etcd
step9:- The Deployment Controller continuously watches the API Server., Deployment Controller Detects Deployment in api-server, creates replica set controller, rs controller will create pods and pods are in pending state as they are not assigned on any node yet
step10:- Scheduler finds unscheduled pods, reads the nodeselectors, resource requests, taints and toleration, topology spread constraints and read the node resources and assigns the pods to nodes.
step11:- kubelet intercats with api-server, kubelet communicates with containerd(container runtime), this runtime checks and pulls the image
12;- kubecelet invokes CNI plugin and pod will receive an IPaddress from pod networking/CNI plugin, volumes are attached to pod by kubelet and containerd will start the container
13:- once container moves to running state, livenessproves/readiness probes are checked

Admission Controller:-
Admission Controllers are one of the most important Kubernetes concepts because they act as gatekeepers between authorization and storing objects in etcd
Authentication verifies who you are.
Authorization verifies what you're allowed to do.
Admission Controllers verify whether the object itself is acceptable.

Authentication
↓
Show passport
(Who are you?)

Authorization
↓
Do you have a valid ticket?
(Are you allowed?)

Admission Controller
↓
Security screening
(Is what you're carrying allowed?)

Popular Admission controllers:-
1. Resource Quota:- checks if the pod resources requests are within resource quota limits
2. LimitRanger:- Adds default requests and limits because requets and limits is mandatory if the namespace has resource quotas configured
3. NamespaceLifecycle:- checks namespace validity, checks if the namespace exists
4. Pod Security Admission:-
5. DefaultStorageClass

kube-controller-manager:-
kube-controller-manager is one of the core control plane components of Kubernetes.
Think of Kubernetes as a system that constantly tries to make the actual state match the desired state.
This is the component responsible for it.
kube-controller-manager is a process that runs multiple controllers.
kube-controller-manager
    ├─ Deployment Controller
    ├─ ReplicaSet Controller
    ├─ Node Controller
    ├─ Job Controller
    ├─ ServiceAccount Controller
    ├─ Namespace Controller
    ├─ Endpoint Controller
    └─ Many others
All controllers continuously watch the API Server.
etcd
↑
API Server
↑
Controllers

Controllers never talk directly to etcd.
They:
Read current state from API Server.
Compare desired vs actual.
Make changes through API Server.

POSSIBLE ERROR CODES:-

pod status is running but application is not accessible

1. 404 Not Found:- wrong ingress path by user
your application is accessible on /path1 but the user is trying to access /, application itself returns "404" because endpoint doesn't exists

2. 502 Bad Gateway:- 
Service has no healthy backend pods it could be because there is mismatch in the application port, the application maybe accessible on 8080 but in the targetport of service
you mentioned like 9090
Client ✅
 ↓
LB ✅
 ↓
Ingress ✅
 ↓
Service ✅
 ↓
Pod ❌

3. 503 Service Unavailable:-
No endpoints behind Service it could be because Pod labels and Service selector mismatch or it could be because readiness probe is failing and Kubernetes removes pod from Service endpoints.
The server is temporarily unable to serve the request because no healthy backend is available.
Client ✅
 ↓
LB ✅
 ↓
Ingress ✅
 ↓
Service ✅
 ↓
No healthy Pods ❌

4. curl: (7) Connection refused:-
application is listening on a different port

5. curl: (28) Operation timed out:-
Network Policy blocking traffic to pods
Node Security Group / Firewall issue, Common in EKS, Load Balancer can reach node?

6. 500 Internal Server Error
The request successfully reached the application server, but the application failed while processing it.
Unlike a 404, where the server says:
"I don't have that page."
A 500 means:
"Something went wrong inside me while trying to handle your request."
Client ✅
LB ✅
Ingress ✅
Service ✅
Pod ✅
Application ❌

In Kubernetes, traffic has already passed through components such as DNS, Load Balancer, Ingress, Service, and Pod. Common causes include application bugs, database connectivity failures, missing configuration, dependency failures, or unhandled exceptions. The first place to investigate is usually the application logs using kubectl logs.

7. 504 Gateway Timeout
1. Is DNS reachable? Is the DNS name correct?does the DNS name actually exists?
2. Is load balancer reachable?
3. check if host name is properly configured in ingress
4. Port mismatch
5. service as no endpoints
6. database timeout
