SIDECAR CONTAINER:-(Video:- https://capgemini.udemy.com/course/modern-java-development-spring-boot-microservices-spring/learn/lecture/57513237#overview)

1. A single pod can contain multiple containers.
2. One container will be the main application container and other containers will be supporting containers and they are called as sidecar containers.
3. Both containers:
Share the same Pod IP address.
Can communicate using localhost.
Can share volumes (files).
Start and stop together.
4. Common Use cases:-
Log Collection
Monitoring
Service Mesh Proxy (Istio)
Secrets Management

NOTE:- A pod can contain multiple application containers but we restrict it to have only one main application container, because if different app containers are present 
they will have different scaling requirements.

example:-
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: dep1
spec:
  replicas: 1
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      type: frontend
  template:
    metadata:
      name: pod
      labels:
        type: frontend
    spec:
      volumes:
      - name: vol1
        emptyDir: {}
      containers:
      - name: con1
        image: busybox
        command:
        - sh
        - -c
        - |
          while true; do
            echo "$(date) Hello World" >> /var/logs/busybox.log
            sleep 20
          done        
        volumeMounts:
        - name: vol1
          mountPath: /var/logs
      - name: con2
        image: nginx:latest
        volumeMounts:
        - name: vol1
          mountPath: /var/lib

Based on what you've described:

Nginx sidecar is probably handling TLS termination/reverse proxy.
Nginx handles the certificate (tls.crt, tls.key), performs the TLS handshake, decrypts the traffic, and forwards it to the app.
This is mainly for HTTPS requests.

Logging is likely handled by a DaemonSet (Fluent Bit, Splunk Forwarder, Azure Monitor Agent, etc.).
Monitoring is likely handled by Prometheus, Datadog, Dynatrace, or Azure Monitor agents running at cluster/node level.

STATIC PODS:-
1. every component in k8s cluster basically runs as pods called static pods, if scheduler itself is running as pod, and scheduler is not responsible for scheduling these pods.
2. Kubelet on the controlplane is responsible for creating controlplane component pods by using manifests stored in /etc/kuberenets/manifests
3. Kubelet must be configured with --pod-manifest-path=/etc/Kubernetes/manifests


KUBE-PROXY:-(Video:- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2twz_FIDIlo)
kube-proxy is a Kubernetes component that runs on every node and is responsible for implementing Service networking.
When an end user tried to access amazon.com. what happens is that associated load balancer from DNS record will be called and it might have endpoints like Nodes and the ports.
How does the traffic get routed to the exact application pod? because there might be many application pods running on a node.
Kube-proxy is helpful here, it will have iptables, where it keeps the record of each nodeip->port and its respective clusterIPservice and the respective pod and its IP.
It sends the traffic to pods in RR format
Endpoints tell Kubernetes where the Pods are, but kube-proxy uses iptables/IPVS to teach the Linux kernel how packets should actually reach those Pods. Without kube-proxy, a Service's ClusterIP is just metadata and traffic would not be forwarded to backend Pods.

NOTE:- Linux doesn't know what 10.96.0.100 is.
It's not a real network interface. It's not assigned to any machine. It's just a virtual IP stored in Kubernetes.
So who tells Linux: kube-proxy
Service created
       ↓
API Server stores Service
       ↓
Endpoints created
       ↓
kube-proxy notices change
       ↓
Creates iptables/IPVS rules
       ↓
Traffic starts flowing

Container Runtime(containerd):-
It is the software that actually runs the containers. pulling the image, creating, start, stopping and deleting the containers. eg;- containerd, cri-o
containerd is the container runtime on EKS.
Kubelet communicates with containerd through the Container Runtime Interface (CRI). Think CRI as a communication protocol. without CRI k8s would work with only docker.
with CRI it can work with any runtime.
containerd calls runc to create the containers
runc's primary job is to create the actual Linux process that becomes your container.
Pod Spec
   |
API Server
   |
Scheduler
   |
Kubelet
   |
   | CRI
   |
containerd
   |
runc
   |
Linux Kernel

CNI(Container Network Interface):-
CNI (Container Network Interface) in Kubernetes is the networking layer that gives Pods their IP addresses and enables Pod-to-Pod, Pod-to-Service, and Pod-to-External communication. Kubernetes itself does not perform the networking. Instead, it relies on a CNI plugin to implement the Kubernetes networking model.
CNI creates those routes and networking rules so that traffic knows where to go.
The container runtime invokes the CNI plugin.
The CNI plugin:
Creates a network interface for the Pod
Assigns an IP address
Configures routing rules
Ensures the Pod can communicate across the cluster
NOTE:- calico is used for local k8s cluster where VPC CNI plugin is used for EKS, Each Pod gets an IP from the VPC subnet.
NOTE:- pod->pod communication done by CNI, pod->service done by kube-proxy
NOTE:- The CNI plugin watches for NetworkPolicy resources and programs the underlying networking layer accordingly. Kubernetes requires a compatible CNI plugin to implement networking behavior.

KEDA(Kubernetes Event driven Autoscaling):-
-> scaling workloads based on real demand- not just memory and cpu
-> autoscaling pods based on events

POD SECURITY:-(Video:- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZoTKkmY6VSw&t=322s)
k8s lets u run containers easily but it doesn't secure them by default. the containers run as root users by default.
Every containerized application ultimately runs as one or more Linux processes on the worker node.
How to check which user is running the container? exec into the container/pod and execute "id" command if it returns o then container is running as root.
NOTE:- this doesn't adhere to the principle of least privileges
Why is this a security concern?
If an attacker compromises the application:
They gain root privileges inside the container.
Although container root is not automatically root on the host, misconfigurations or container escape vulnerabilities can make this dangerous.
They may access mounted secrets, service account tokens, or writable volumes. If the host filesystem is mounted into the container and the process runs as root, the attacker may be able to read or alter files from the host.

NOTE:- You can create the user in the dockerfile itself, then the container will run as that user by default instead of running as root user

1. security Context:- (Po/container Level)
Applicable at pod and container level
Pod+Container level:- 
-> settings can be defined at both pod level or container level, If both levels are defines then container level is given the higher priority.
-> runAsUser:- Run all processes in this container as this Linux User ID (UID).
-> runAsGroup:- You can tell Kubernetes to use a specific group
-> runAsNonRoot:- Do not start this container if it would run as root.
Most production environments use:
securityContext:
runAsNonRoot: true, Acts as a safety check.
runAsUser: 1000, Specifies exactly which user to use.

NOTE:- runAsUser does not create a new Linux user.
If the UID exists in the container image's /etc/passwd, it will map to that username; otherwise the process still runs with that numeric UID

Pod Level:-
fsgroup:- U are running a container as non-root but you want to make some changes in the volumes but that volume is owned by root user in that acse our user cannot access those volumes "Permission denied"
ls -l /data
-rw------- 1 root root data.txt
spec:
  securityContext:
    fsGroup: 2000
Above changes the group ownership of the volume to 2000, And Kubernetes automatically makes the container process a member of that group. You have to go inside the volume directory to create or delete files by using exec.

container level:-
1. allowPrivilegeEscalation: false
This controls whether a process can gain more privileges than it started with. even suid bit is set
2. privileged: true
Container gets almost unrestricted access to the host.
3. readOnlyRootFilesystem
Makes container filesystem read-only. Attacker cannot:
apt install
rm system files
modify binaries

NOTE;- RunContainerError is a Kubernetes pod state that means:
The container runtime was able to pull/create the container, but it failed while trying to start the container process. the volume was created by root but nonroot user is trying to write to volume without fsgroup

LINUX Capabilities:-(Container level)
They are few tasks that a normal user cannot perform like
Linux capabilities divide root privileges into smaller permission sets. Instead of running a container as fully privileged root, Kubernetes can grant only the specific privileges required by an application. For example, NET_BIND_SERVICE allows a non-root container to listen on port 80, while NET_ADMIN allows network configuration changes. This follows the principle of least privilege and significantly reduces the attack surface compared to running privileged containers.
securityContext:
  runAsNonRoot: true
  allowPrivilegeEscalation: false

  capabilities:
    drop:
      - ALL
    add:
      - NET_BIND_SERVICE

NOTE:- how will we know what permission are given to linux user because when i create a user in my dockerfile im not specifying any permissioms or policies to it? how does it get it?
Basically in linux we can see the option like "others" right it can perform all those things, that's where it gets the file permissions from
Commands like mkdir, touch, rm, and cp are not special privileged operations. Whether they work depends on the permissions of the directory you're operating in.
Capabilities are separate from file permissions they are like accessing ports chown

POD PRIORITY, PRIORITY CLASS AND PREEMPTION:-(Video:- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IICe8Z0lTa4&t=5s)

1. when pods are created they will first be in pending state, if the requested resources not available they will continue to be in pending state.
2. scheduler waits for the resources to be available or it will kick out the pods which are a low priority.
3. which pod to evict is called preemption and and which pod to schedule first is called priority. higher the number higher the priority.
4. Priority class:- PriorityClass helps Kubernetes decide which pods should run first and which should be protected during resource shortages.

apiVersion: scheduling.k8s.io/v1
kind: PriorityClass
metadata:
  name: high-priority
value: 10000
globalDefault: false
description: "Critical application pods"

NOTE:- globalDefault: true, Then pods without priorityClassName automatically get priority defines in the priority class.
Below are default priority classes:-
system-node-critical
system-cluster-critical, Used by:
CoreDNS
kube-proxy
CNI plugins
Other critical system workloads
These should not normally be used by application teams.

apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: nginx
spec:
  priorityClassName: high-priority
  containers:
  - name: nginx
    image: nginx

PriorityClass is commonly used for:
Ingress controllers (NGINX)
CoreDNS
Monitoring stack (Prometheus)
Logging stack
Critical business applications
