INGRESS:-(Video:- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kf3UjITS91M)

Disadvantages of Load Balancer:-
1. dependent on cloud provider.
2. It is very expensive
3. Security:- we have to use what is provided
4. they do not support with path based routing.

with LB
auth.amazon.com
product.amazon.com
cart.amazon.com

But what we need 
amazon.com/login
amazon.com/products
amazon.com/cart

why ingress?

what is ingress?
🧠 In Layman Terms
Think of your house 🏠:
• You have many rooms inside (like your app services)
• But people from outside can’t directly walk into any room
• They enter through the main gate or door
👉 That main door = Ingress
So:
• Outside users (internet) → come to one entry point
• That entry point decides which room (service) they should go to
Example:
If someone visits:
• myapp.com/login → go to login service
• myapp.com/products → go to product service
👉 One door, smart routing inside

1. Ingress is incoming traffic to ur application.
2. Ingress is an API object that manages external HTTP/HTTPS access to services inside a cluster.
🔹 Problem it solves
Without Ingress:
• Each service needs its own LoadBalancer (costly + messy)
With Ingress:
• One entry point
• Routes traffic to multiple services

NOTE:- User → Load Balancer → Ingress Controller → Service → Pods

Step 1: 🌐 User → Load Balancer
• Cloud LB receives request
Step 2: 🚦 Load Balancer → Ingress Controller
• Forwards traffic into cluster
Step 3: 🧠 Ingress Controller checks rules
• Reads Ingress Resource
• Sees:
• /api → api-service
Step 4: 🔀 Routes to Service
• Sends request to correct service
Step 5: ⚙️ Service → Pod
• Load balances across pods
Step 6: ✅ Response goes back same path

Ingress is a Kubernetes resource that manages external access to services inside the cluster.
It lets you route traffic (like HTTP/HTTPS) to different services based on URL or domain.
Instead of exposing many services, you use one entry point (Ingress) to control everything.
 
NOTE:- Ingress resource is useless, unless and until we have ingress controller deployed in our k8s cluster.

Step 1:- Deploy the ingress controller(basically developed by load balancers companies) using helm, which ingress-controller to use will be usually decided by the devops, devs and architects and other teams. It is a single time installation to your cluster.
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kubernetes/ingress-nginx/main/deploy/static/provider/cloud/deploy.yaml
NOTE:- Ingress controller is exposed using aservice type loadblancer that triggers cloud provider load blancer
A Loadbalancer service type is automatically created when we deploy ingress controller, when k8s sees this loadbalancer service it asks the Cloud provider to create load balancer.

Step 2:- Create a deployment and deploy it.
Step 3:- create a clusterIP service and deploy it
Step 4:- create a ingress service and deploy it
apiVersion: networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: Ingress
metadata:
 name: my-app-ingress
spec:
 ingressClassName: nginx
 rules:
 - host: myapp.com
   http:
     paths:
     - path: /
       pathType: Prefix
       backend:
         service:
           name: my-app-service
           port:
             number: 80
step5:- change lodablancer service type to nodeport
step6:- curl -H "Host: myapp.com" http://localhost:31653->Nodeport
NOTE:- ingressClassName is mandatory because we are telling the cluster to use the nginx ingress controller for routing when there are multiple imgress controllers in the namespaces.

NOTE:-
1. if a Load balancer has a security group, then even the node on which the pod is running must have security groups to allow it

K8S TROUBLESHOOTING:-

IMGPULLBACKOFF:-
1. Two cases where you will face this error:-
 1.1 Invalid image name, non existent image
 1.2:- trying to pull the images from private registry
2. The first error message you see is not "imgpullbackoff", it is "errorimgpull". what k8s does is when it notices errorimagepull, it will wait for sometime like 10sec and try to pull the image because sometimes there might be network issues when pulling the image, so it will try again in a incremental way, next time it will wait for 20sec and try again and it keeps trying. Now the "errimgpull" is converted to "imgpullbackoff"
3. To resolve error 1.1 make sure you provide correct image by checking the commands such as describe, events.
4. To resolve error1.2 you must create "imagepullsecret" that contains the private registry credentials.
5. In eks, to resolve 1.2 If the image is being pulled by a kubelet that is on a node that is in private subnet, then "impullsecrets" will not be required, it will need 2 permissions:-
 5.1 the node IAM role must have roles/permission to pull the image from ECR
 5.2 the node must have internet access to pull the image but as it is in VPC private subnet we can create VPC endpoints.

NOTE:-
Why IRSA cannot be used for image pulls
The key reason is Container images are pulled before the Pod starts, but IRSA only works after the Pod is running.

CRASHLOOPBACKOFF:-

1. A pod gets scheduled onto a node by the scheduler, kubelete in the node will pull the image and update the status of the pod from "pending" to "container creating".
2. From the "container creating" status the pod can move to either "running" or "error" status.
3. From "running/error" status it can move to "crashed" state and k8s will try to restart the pod in an incremental limit, it will again go to "container creation" and this is a loop

Main reasons for crashloopbackoff error:-
1. providing wrong command line arguments eg:- passing app1.py instead of app.py in "CMD python3 app.py"
2. liveness probe has failed then container will go into crashloopbackoff.
3. Out of memory error-------->reach out to developer to increase the limits you should not do it by yourself, repeated OOM error will result in crashloopbackoff.

DEPLOYMENT STRATAGIES:-(Video:- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0QhUhrWGB9k&t=131s)

why do we need deployment strategy:-
If you want to deploy a new version of an already running application with less or zero downtime.
Disadvantages of downtime are revenue loss and loss of cutomers due to bad user experience

I) Rolling update:-
1. This is default deployment strategy that is provided by k8s.
2. Using this strategy it is possible to achieve nearly zero downtime.
3. Let us assume we have an application with version v1 and 4 replicas running, and we want to update the version to v2. In rolling update the maxunavailable is 25% and maxsurger is 25%, which meand, when we update the version from v1 to v2 in th deployment manifest, 25% of 4 replicas which is 1 replica of v2 will be created first and then 1 replica of v1 will be deleted.
4. It is very important to specify readiness probe in the manifest so that it will make the pod is ready to accept the traffic before deleting a v1 pod.
5. Kubernetes uses the readiness probe to decide when a new Pod is safe to receive traffic and when an old Pod can stop receiving traffic during a rolling update.

For a Deployment with strategy RollingUpdate:
New Pod (new version) is created
Pod transitions to Running
Readiness probe is checked
✅ If Ready → Pod is added to Service endpoints (gets traffic)
❌ If NotReady → Pod receives no traffic
Old Pods are terminated only after enough new Pods are Ready

II) Canary Deployment:-
why do we need canary deployment when rolling update has almost zero downtime?
1. When are doing prod deployment of a new version it does not directly go to prod, it goes through a series of environments like dev, qa, pre-pod by promoting the same version.
2. the new version v2 might work fine in all these envionemnts but face some issues because the database in prod  or infra is different from the dev,qa databases.
3. In canary deployment what we will do is we will release v2 for specific set of users means in our cluster 90% pods belong to v1 and 10% of pods belong to v2 and we will tell the load balancer to send 90% of traffic to v1 pods and 10% of traffic to v2 pods.
4. In rolling update this control of traffic is not possible, we cannot test real time prod users. In case of canary deployment we can test in realtime prod env by sending set if users to new version, so in case of any issues we can either fix it or rollback to previous version.

Example:- create de, ser n ingress for v1 and create dep, service and ingress for v1
A canary ingress works only when there is a NORMAL (stable) ingress already present with the same host + path but without canary annotations.
ingress for v2:-


apiVersion: networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: Ingress
metadata:
  name: ing1
  annotations:
    nginx.ingress.kubernetes.io/canary: "true"
    nginx.ingress.kubernetes.io/canary-weight: "20"
spec:
  ingressClassName: nginx
  rules:
    - host: myapp.com
      http:
        paths:
        - path: /
          pathType: Prefix
          backend:
            service:
              name: ser1
              port:
                number: 8080

To check if traffic is being sent properly:-
for i in {1..20}; do   curl -H "Host: myapp.com" http://localhost:31653; done

NOTE:-
nginx.ingress.kubernetes.io/canary: "true"
✅ Tells NGINX:
“This ingress is NOT the main one – it is a canary”
Without this:
Your ingress would conflict with the main ingress
API server would block it (duplicate host + path)

III)Blue/Green deployment:-
1. The safest and most costliest deployment strategy.

CUSTOM RESOURCE/CUSTOM RESOURCE DEFINITION:-(Video:- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=alGEPSQxbLg&list=PLdpzxOOAlwvJdsW6A0jCz_3VaANuFMLpc&index=13)
Video:- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3huz7lRzUQo&list=PLl4APkPHzsUUOkOv3i62UidrLmSB8DcGC&index=51
sample lab:- https://github.com/piyushsachdeva/CKA-2024/tree/main/Resources/Day49-CustomResources

Why do we need CR/CRD:-
1. k8s cluster comes with some default or native k8s resources like deployment, service, configmaps and etc.
2. If your k8s cluster default resources doesnot support the functionality that is required for your application, then to extend the capabilities of k8s or to extend API server in k8s to support creation of custom functionalities we use CR/CRD.
for eg:- argoCD, advanced security capabilities.
NOTe:- CNCF is all about the custom k8s controllers

There are 2 actors, devops and user
1. Deploying the custom Resource definition and custom controller to the k8s is the job of devops.
2. user/devops can create the custom resource

There are many services/features which provide additional functionalities to k8s.
K8s has already accomodated logic to the native resources and adding logic to these 100s and 1000s of other functionalities/features is hectic to k8s team/developers.
To support the additional functionality we will extend the capabilities of API.

To extend capabilities of API there are 3 resources, CR, CRB, custom controller.

CRD:-
If you want k8s to support additional functionality such as argocd, then argocd team must develop a CRD(defining a new type of api).
CRD is nothing but a template definition that will be used by k8s to extend the capabilities and validate the k8s resource created.
Even for the native resources like deployment we have CRD that is already present in the k8s API server.

CR:-
This is the yaml submitted by user to create resource in k8s.

Custom controller:-
It manages the lifecycle of CR.
Deployment controller is responsible for creating replica set and making sure the pods are created.
In the same way we will need a custom controller to watch and manage your custom resource.

DNS(Domain Name System):-
1. Domain names are google.com, facebook.com.
2. When you type the donaim names in your browser, it sends a request to DNS server and fetches the IP address of the Domain name and then request is ent to that IPaddress by your browser.
3. DNS resolution:- converting the Domain Names into IPaddresses.

Drawbacks of DNS server:-
1. When there are billion of requests a single DNs server will not be able to support everything and it might go down. The solution is multiple copies of Domain Name servers called Route Name servers.
2. Even though if is able to support, it takes few seconds to send the request to DNS server and fetch the IPaddress.
The solution is DNS caching.

User browser chaches the IPaddress of the Domain Name after it made it first call to the Domain Name server to fetch IPaddress.
nslookup <Domain-name>:- displays the IPaddress of the Domain Name.

Root Name servers:-
There are only 13 hardcoded server names, but internally there are more servers.
www.google.com:- .com is a top level domain

COREDNS:-(Video:-https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VcWpZoRAQXE&t=1s)
Notes:- https://notes.kodekloud.com/docs/Certified-Kubernetes-Administrator-CKA/Networking/CoreDNS-in-Kubernetes/page
Why do we need CoreDNS?
we usually create service to access pods via service as pods IPaddresses are not static.
If we try to access the service by the service name we will get could not resolve host but when we try to access the service with IPaddress we are able to access it successfully.
The problem here DNS is not able to resolve service name to its IPaddress. There is some issue with your DNS.

In k8s, To be able to resolve the service name into its IPaddress, coreDNS will be required, its pods must be running.
CoreDNS is a DNS server provides the funtionality of domain name resolution of service to its IPname.

NOTE:-
1. Id podA wants to communicate with podB using IPaddress it is possible without any extra/human interventions, The cluster network (CNI) ensures direct IP-to-IP routing
2. If podA wants to communicate with podB using the pod name
curl http://podB
Now the system must resolve podB to an IP, so it checks (in order):
/etc/hosts
DNS (CoreDNS in Kubernetes)
3. In Kubernetes:
/etc/hosts inside a pod is auto-generated
It usually contains:
localhost
The pod’s own hostname
It does NOT contain other pods’ IPs
4. Instead of manually editing etc/hosts for each and every pod, Kubernetes deploys a central DNS server. Each pod is pre-configured via its /etc/resolv.conf file to use this centralized server (typically at 10.96.0.10), which automatically updates DNS records for new pods and services by communicating with APIserver
cat /etc/resolv.conf:- displays the IP address of the DNS server.
o/p:-
nameserver 10.96.0.10
5. What is /etc/resolv.conf?
❓ “When I see a name like google.com or myservice, who should I ask for the IP address?”
📄 /etc/resolv.conf is the answer to that question.
It tells the system:
Which DNS server to ask
Which domain to assume if a name is incomplete
In what order to search names
So Kubernetes:
✅ Auto-generates /etc/resolv.conf
✅ Injects CoreDNS service IP
✅ Ensures consistent DNS behavior across all pods
6. /etc/hosts answers “what is this name?”
/etc/resolv.conf answers “who should I ask?”
7. coreDNS does not create DNS records for pods as they are epimeral in nature
